 
 
1 
 
 
EUROPEAN COMMISSION  
MEMO  
12 December 2017  
Questions and Answers – the rights of EU 27 and UK citizens 
post-Brexit, as outlined  in the Joint Report from the 
Negotiators of the European Union and the United Kingdom 
Government  
This document provides information on the common understanding reached on the rights of 
EU27 and UK citizens' post-Brexit  as set out in the  Joint Report from the negotiators of the 
European Union and the United  Kingdom Government  on progress during phase 1 of 
negotiations under Article 50 TEU on the United Kingdom's orderly withdrawal from the 
European Union.  Should the European Council  (Article 50)  consider  on 15 December  that 
sufficient progress has been made i n the negotiations, the Withdrawal Agreement based on 
Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union  – on which citizens will base their rights – should be 
drafted on the basis of the Joint Report and the outcome of the negotiations on other separation 
issues.  This present  document interprets the Joint Report for information purposes  only and 
should not be understood as the final text of the Withdrawal Agreement.1    
 
Personal scope  
Who will be covered by the Withdrawal Agreement ? 
EU citizens must be lawfully residing in the host state on t he date of the UK's withdrawal,  in 
accordance with EU law on free movement of EU citizens.  
The conditions of residence are the same as those under current EU law. Decisions for obtaining 
the status under the Withdrawal Agreem ent will be made with the objective criteria established 
therein (i.e. no discretion) , and on the basis of the exact same conditions set out in the Free 
Movement Directive (Articles 6 and 7 confer a right of residence for up to five years  on those 
who work  or have sufficient financial resources and sickness insurance) , Articles 16 – 18 confer 
a right of permanent residence  on those who have resided legally for five years ).   
The Withdrawal Agreement does not require physical presence in the host state on the date of 
the UK's withdrawal  – temporary absences that do not affect the right of residence are 
accepted.  
                                                           
1 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/joint -report -negotiators -european -union -and-united -
kingdom -government -progress -during -phase -1-negotiations -under -article -50-teu-united -kingdoms -
orderly -withdrawal -european -union_en   
 
2 
 
I arrived in the UK two years ago and work in a local hospital. Can I 
stay after the UK leaves the EU?  
Yes. The agreement provides that y ou will be able to stay in the UK if you continue to work (or 
if you stop involuntarily working  in accordance with Article 7(3) of the Free Movement 
Directive ). Your residence rights in the UK will not be affected by Brexit: you will keep your 
residence un der the conditions of EU free movement law as if it still applied , although you will 
need to make an application to the UK authorities for status .  Once you have accumulated five 
years of legal residence in the UK, you will be able to apply for your reside nce status in the UK 
to be upgraded to a permanent one  that offers more rights and better protection.  
I am British living and working in Luxembourg. Do I have to keep 
working to retain my rights there ? 
The Joint Report protects those EU citizens who were residing in a Member State other than 
that of their nationality in accordance with the conditions which EU free movement law attaches 
to the right of residence. In essence, EU citizens meet these conditions if they:  
 are workers or self -employed;  
 have suffi cient resources and sickness insurance;  
 are family members of some other EU citizen who meets these conditions; or  
 have already acquired right of permanent residence (that is no longer subject to 
any conditions).  
It is possible to switch between these cat egories. You will keep your rights as long as you meet 
the conditions for at least one category.  
I have reside d in the UK since 2005  and acquired a permanent 
residence  document  there. Will something change for me  post-Brexit ? 
You will have to apply for a new permanent status under UK law (called special  status) but, as 
you have already obtained a permanent residence  document  in the UK under existing EU free 
movement law, the administrative procedure will be very light -touch and  you will just have to 
present an ID , declare any criminal convictions  and show that you continue to reside in the UK. 
Your new UK residence document will be issued free of charge.   
 
3 
 
I am a UK citizen. Two years ago, I arrived in Germany  to work in 
construct ion. Unfortunately, I recently had an accident at work and I 
am permanent ly incapa citated . I hope I will not have to leave  post-
Brexit ! 
You won’t. Those who had to stop working as a result of permanent incapacity to work caused 
by an accident at work obtain a right of permanent residence  under EU free movement law . 
That right will be retained  after Brexit . 
Will those EU citizens arriving in the UK look ing for a job several 
months before Brexit be protected in any way?  
Yes. EU citizen s looking for jobs in the UK at the Brexit date will be allowed to stay , like today , 
for six months after their arrival (maybe a little bit longer if they have a genuine chance of 
being hired soon) . Once the allowed period of job -seeking is over, they will have to leave unless 
they really have found a job or have sufficient financial resources  to support themselves.  
I live in London  but commute to Paris for work . Will I be able to 
continue working in France  after Brexit?  
Yes. The deal also protects frontier workers. You will be able to continue working in Paris while 
residing in London . 
I arrived  in the UK  two years ago but did not find a job. I am currently 
out of money. Will I be able to stay on  post-Brexit ? 
The Joint Report  protects those EU citizens who were residing in a Member State other than 
that of their nationality in accordance with the conditions which EU free movement law attaches 
to the right of residence. In essence, EU citizens meet these conditions if they:  
 are workers or self -employed;  
 have sufficient resources and sickness insurance;  
 are family members of some other EU citizen who meets these conditions; or  
 have already acquired right of permanent residence (that is no longer subject to 
any conditions) . 
Those EU citizens who do not meet these conditions at Brexit will have no legal entitlement to 
stay in the UK and their situation will depend on whether the UK authorities decide to treat 
them more favourably than required by the deal.   For example, the UK autho rities have 
indicated that they will not ask people  who have sufficient  resources , including students,  for 
evidence of comprehensive sickness insurance.   
 
4 
 
I arrived in the UK many years ago to join my British wife. She is 
disabled and I care  for her  and assist her. I think that my residence in 
the UK is legal but I am concerned whether I will be able to get any 
protection after Brexit under the Withdrawal Agreement.  
Only those EU citizens who were residing in the UK at the time of  Brexit in accordanc e with the 
conditions which EU free movement law attaches to the right of residence are guaranteed to be 
protected by the Withdrawal Agreement.  
EU citizens who do reside in the UK under domestic laws (family members of British nationals)  
but do not meet th e EU free movement law conditions will be able to stay under these domestic 
laws that are not affected by Brexit.  
The UK's agreement to waive the comprehensive sickness insurance 
requirement is unilateral and non -binding. What is its worth?  
We seek to pro tect the rights as they stand under current EU law, nothing more, nothing less.  
The comprehensive sickness insurance is clearly a requirement for lawful residence of self -
sufficient persons as set out in in Article 7(1)(b) of the Free Movement Directive. T he UK has 
indicated that they will apply neither the comprehensive sickness insurance condition, no r the 
"genuine work test"  in the application for the status.2  
EU 27 Member States are, as under current EU law, free to do the same  (Article 37 of Directive 
2004/38/EC) . 
I am British and m y dad works in Portugal. I live with him  and go to a 
local school . Will I be allowed to stay in Portugal ? 
Yes, you will be able to stay. The deal makes sure that all family members, irrespective of 
whether they are EU citizens or not, who were lawfully residing with an EU citizen in the UK  or 
the EU27  at the date of the UK's withdrawal  can stay under the same conditions that existed 
before Brexit.  
                                                           
2  See point 11 of the UK's technical note of 8 November on admin procedures, available at 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/citizens -rights -administrative -procedures -in-the-
uk/technical -note-citizens -rights -administrative -procedures -in-the-uk.  
 
5 
 
I am a Korean spouse. I came to the UK four years ago to live with my 
EU husband but the marriage hit a rough patch recently. I want to file 
for divorce but I am afraid w hat it will mean for my right of residence  
post-Brexit . 
The Joint Report  replicates EU free movement law that, under certain conditions,  already 
protects non -EU spouses who divorce from an EU citizen . You meet those conditions. Once your 
divorce becomes final, you will nevertheless need to show the UK authorities that you meet the 
condition s which EU law on free movement attaches to the right of residence as if you were an 
EU citizen yourself.  Once you accumulate five years of continuous lawful residence, you will be 
able to apply for a permanent status in the UK.  
Years ago, I came to the UK  to work, relying on my Czech nationality. 
Recently, I have naturalised. As a dual Czech/British national, what will 
my status  be? 
Your British nationality gives you an unconditional right of residence in the UK. Since your 
naturalisation, your residence in the UK is no longer under the Free Movement Directive. Your 
Czech nationality, on the other hand, ensures that you continue to be  covered by the 
withdrawal agreement . You will therefore be able to rely on the agreement  for example, family 
reunion rights . 
I am British and I live with my family in Italy. I understand that my 
right to stay in Italy will be protected – but what about my  right to 
return to the UK with my family ? 
The deal protects the rights of those who have made use of their free movement and live in a 
state other than that of their nationality. It does not protect those who reside in the state of 
their nationality, rega rdless of whether they have returned home before Brexit or after Brexit. 
Their rights will be subject to relevant domestic rules.   
 
6 
 
Family members  
I live and work in the UK with my partner. We plan to  have a baby 
soon. Should we accelerate our plans and have the baby before Brexit?  
You do not need to rush. The deal makes sure that children born to EU families residing in the 
UK before or after Brexit will be able to stay. In some situations, UK law awa rds British 
citizenship to such children, in addition to the nationality the child may have through their 
parents.  
I live in the UK with my EU spouse. I was issued with an EU residence 
card. Can I stay  post-Brexit ? 
Yes, you can stay. The deal protects all those family members who have lawfully resided with 
an EU citizen in the UK before Brexit. They will be allowed to stay but will have to apply for a 
new UK status (special  status) and a new UK residence document.  
I live in the UK with the child I adopted. Will we be able to stay 
together?  
Yes, you will be able to stay together. The Joint Report  protects all those family members who 
have lawfully resided with a n EU citizen in the UK before Brexit. Adopted children are  treated in 
the same way as biological children.  
Several years ago, I applied to the UK authorities to be able to join my 
EU cousin living in Edinburgh because I was materially dependent on 
her. The UK authorities accepted that and issued me with an EU 
residence card. What will happen to me?  
You can stay. The Joint Report  protects all those family members who have lawfully resided 
with an EU citizen in the UK before Brexit. They will be allowed to stay but will have to apply for 
a new UK status (special  status) and a new UK residence document.  
I am the registered partner of an EU citizen residing in the UK. I plan to 
join him there but I can do it only in four years because of existing 
work commitments in my country. Will I be able to join him even after 
Brexit?  
Yes. The deal protects partners who were in such a  partnership with an EU citizen on Brexit  day 
but were not residing with that partner in the UK  – exactly the same way as spouses . You will 
be able to join your EU partner in the UK , provided that you remain his or her  registered 
partner  at the point you seek to come to the UK.   
 
7 
 
I am the nephew of an EU citizen residing in the UK. I plan to join him 
there but I can do it only in four years because of existing study 
commitments in my country. Will I be able to join him even after 
Brexit?  
No. The deal does not protect extended family members of EU citizens (except those in durable 
partnerships ) who were related to a n EU citizen on the date of the UK's withdrawal  but we re not 
residing with the ir relative on that date.  If you decide to join your relative  after Brexit , you will 
be subject to UK immigration law.  
I live and study in Cardiff . My wife lives abroad, together with our little 
baby. They would like to join me  once the studies are over and I have 
found a job. Will they be able to do so after Brexit or had they better 
hurry?  
They will be able to join you after Brexit . The deal protects not only those close family members 
who have lawfully resided with an EU citizen in the UK before Brexit, but also those close family 
members who were related to an EU citizen on Brexit but were not residing in the UK. They will 
be able  to join you after Brexit, provided you  remain married at the point your wife seeks to 
come to the UK .  
I live and work in the UK. I am single but, hopefully, one day I will 
marry. Realistically, it will be after Brexit. Will my future spouse be 
able to jo in me in the UK? What about if we have a baby?  
No. The deal does not protect those who will marry an EU citizen after Brexit.  Any s uch future 
spouse will have to comply with the UK immigration rules.3 Any future child  will be able to join 
an EU citizen resident in the UK before Brexit if that parent has legal custody of the child.  
 
                                                           
3 This important matter should be dealt with in the second phase of the negotiations. See here: 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/communication -commission -european -council -article -50-
state-progress -negotiations -united -kingdom -under -article -50-treaty -european -union_en    
 
8 
 
Residence rights  
I study in the UK at university. If all goes well, my studies will finish in 
2020. Will I be able to stay in the UK and  look for a job there?  
Yes. You will be able to stay in the UK after Brexit , as now, as a student or for example as a 
jobseeker or worker. After five years of residence you will be able to apply for a new permanent 
status under UK law (called special  status). EU citizens resident in the UK before Brexit will 
continue to be able to ‘switch’ between different categories of activity. In other words, students 
will be able to start working (and become workers) , workers will be able to retire (and become 
self-sufficient persons) , self-sufficient persons will be able to start studying and so on.  
I am British and have work ed in the Netherlands  since 1995. I plan to 
retire in 2023. I am looking for advice on whether I will be able to stay  
after my retirement . 
Yes. As somebody who has worked for at least five years, you have already obtained a right of 
permanent residence in the Netherlands  that is no longer subject to any conditions (such as 
that you have to continue working) .  
I live in the UK with my mum  who works as an engineer. I go to school 
but I hope to open my own shop and sell flowers. Will I be able to  stay 
and start working once I have finished school?  
Yes. You will not only be able to stay in the UK, but you will also keep all the options EU free 
movement law currently confers on EU citizens. You will be able to work, study, run a business 
or stay at home and care for your family members .  
I arrived in the UK two years ago to study. Last year I studied in Italy 
on Erasmus+  for five months and then returned to my UK university. I 
hope this move has no negative impact on my residence in the UK!  
It will have no impact on your rights in the UK.  Once you have completed five years of 
continuous residence in the UK (including pre - and post -Brexit periods of residence) , you will be 
able to apply for a new permanent status  (special  status)  in the UK. Today's EU free movement 
law says that periods of absence of less than six months in a year do not affect continuity of 
residence. Thes e safeguards are included in the Joint Report  as well.   
 
9 
 
I arrived in the UK three years ago and have  been self -employed since . 
Will I be able to get permanent residence there and , if so, under wh at 
conditions?  
Once you have completed five years of legal residence in the UK (including pre - and post -Brexit 
periods of residence) , you will be able to apply for a new permanent status in the UK.  
The deal protects those EU citizens who were residing in a Member State other than that of 
their nationality in accordance with the conditions which EU free movement law attaches to the 
right of residence. In essence, residence of EU citizens is legal if they:  
 are workers or self -employed;  
 have sufficient resources and sickness insurance; or  
 are fami ly members of an EU citizen who meets these conditions.  
Once you have five years of continuous and legal residence, you will be able to apply for a new 
permanent status (special  status) in the UK and you will be issued with a new UK residence 
document.   The UK authorities have indicated  that they will not ask people who have sufficient  
resources , including students, for evidence of comprehensive sickness insurance.  
I am British and have lived in Austria  with my parents for nine years. 
They both work. Do I have any residence rights in Austria post -Brexit ? 
Yes. As somebody who has lived in an EU Member State  for at least five years, you have 
already obtained a right of permanent residence that is no longer  subject to any conditions 
(such as that you have to continue being a family member) . This right will be preserved under 
the Joint Report .  
I have permanent residence in the UK where I was born and raised. My 
university studies are well underway and I alre ady have a great job 
offer in Slovakia . They are offering me a three -year contract but I am 
afraid that if I leave the UK I will not be able to return. Please, dispel 
my doubts!  
Given the exceptional circumstances of Brexit, the deal  prevents the new UK permanent 
residence status  (special  status)  from lapsing in case of absences of less than five continuous 
years. Once you have applied for and obtained that status from the UK authorities you will be 
able to leave the UK for up to five years and then retur n with out that status lapsing .  
 
10 
 
I have been living and working in the UK for 15 years. I hope that I will 
be able to remain in the UK after Brexit. Could you please reassure me 
that I will be able to keep my rights and entitlements indefinitely?  
The deal makes it clear that there is no ‘expiry date’ by which  rights expire. All those protected 
under the Withdrawal Agreement will keep their rights and entitlement for life . 
However, the Agreement provides that some rights may lapse in certain circums tances. For 
example, the new UK permanent residence status (special  status)  lapses if a person is absent 
from the host state for a continuous period exceeding five years.  
It is not fair that UK nationals will be land locked in the EU country 
where they res ided on the date of the UK's withdrawal  as the Joint 
Report  does not include the right to intra -EU mobility after Brexit . 
It is fair to say that UK citizens are unlikely to be “landlocked”, although the extent to which 
they will be able to work, establish a business, study, claim benefits or get health care outside 
their host state has yet to be decided.  Even if the final withdrawal agreement does not include 
a right of free movement across the EU 27 for UK citizens in the EU, there is detailed EU 
legislat ion dealing with rights of third country nationals to move within the EU.  
I reside permanently in the UK. I am in receipt of a social assistance 
benefit. I guess I will be able to stay in the UK after Brexit but will I 
still get the benefit I need?  
Yes. All EU citizens resident in the UK who qualify for a new UK status after Brexit will keep 
their right of residence  and of equal treatment. This mean s that where they were entitled to a 
benefit, entitlement or advantage before Brexit, they will continue to e njoy the same treatment.  
I am an EU citizen studying at a university in the UK. Will I have to pay 
higher tuition fee after Brexit? Will I have access to student loans?  
All EU citizens resident in the UK who qualify for a new UK status after Brexit will ke ep their 
right of residence  and of equal treatment.  
For students  who started their studies in the UK before Brexit , this mean s that they will 
continue to pay the same tuition fees as British citizens  and be eligible for tuition fee loans . As 
regards acces s to maintenance aid for studies, such as  student grants or student loans, EU 
students in the scope of the Withdrawal Agreement will continue to enjoy the same rules as 
they enjoy today.  These entitlements will be subject to any future domestic policy changes 
which apply to UK nationals.   
 
11 
 
Competence of the Court of Justice of the European Union will expire in 
eight years. Does it mean that my rights will expire as well  post-Brexit ? 
Your rights have no expir y date (but they may lapse in certain circumstan ces, for example a 
long absence from the host state).  
While the ability of UK courts to ask the Court of Justice for its interpretation of the Withdrawal 
Agreement is envisaged to be limited to eight years, it will be long enough to ensure that the 
Court of Justice can rule on the most significant issues.  
Other aspects of the Withdrawal Agreement are not limited in time, such as the direct effect of 
the Withdrawal Agreement that should prevail over incompatible national legislation or 
measures and that UK courts have to take into account jurisprudence of the Court of Justice.  
I note that the criteria for residence will be based on concepts of EU 
free movement law, as interpreted by the Court of Justice of the 
European Union but I believe that the UK has not  correctly enacted EU 
free movement law so they use wrong interpretation.  
The Joint Report  is clear: where the criteria for residence are based on concepts of EU free 
movement law, they must be interpreted in line with decisions given by the Court of Justi ce of 
the European Union at the point of withdrawal . Where the UK relies on an incorrect 
interpretation of the concepts of EU law  that conflicts with such a decision , it is the Court of 
Justice interpretation that must ultimately prevail.  In addition, UK c ourts must have due regard 
to the interpretations of the Court of Justice of the European Union after withdrawal .  
 
12 
 
Criminality  & abuse  
I have lived and work ed in the UK for 11 years. A couple of years ago I 
was convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to a five -month term 
of imprisonment. Will this imprisonment affect my right s? 
Criminal conduct may have consequences for the right of residence, be it under today's EU free 
movement law or under the Withdrawal Agreement . For criminality committed before Brexit, the 
current rules of the Free Movement Directive will apply (Chapter VI) .  
All decisions affecting the right of residence taken on grounds of criminality committed before 
Brexit will have to be taken  on a strict c ase-by-case basis and only those offenders whose 
personal conduct represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of 
the fundamental interests of society can be removed.  
What will happen to EU citizens allowed to stay in the UK under the 
Withdrawal Agreement who commit a serious crime?  
Any criminality committed after Brexit will be subject to national law . In the UK, this means that 
those who commit a crime which leads to a sentence of imprisonment of 12 months or more will 
be co nsidered for deportation.  They will have the right to appeal against such a decision and 
have an independent court review their case.   
I am worried that many will try to cheat their way in by pretending to 
be covered by the Withdrawal Agreement. What safeguards will the 
authorities have?  
All the current safeguards which Member States  have at their disposal under EU free movement 
law to guard against abuse and fraud will be replicated under the Withdrawal Agreement . States 
will be able to adopt the nece ssary measures to refuse, terminate or withdraw any right 
conferred by the Withdrawal Agreement  in the case of abuse of rights or fraud, such as 
marriages of convenience. Any such measure  will have to be proportionate and will be subject 
to judicial redres s. 
Will decisions of the UK authorities based on a buse of rights rules 
result in loss of the appeal right s?  
Abuse or fraud can result in loss of residence but never in loss of appeal rights. Today, the host 
Member State can restrict free movement rights of those EU citizens who are proven to be 
abusing EU law (such as marriages of convenience) . Once abuse or fra ud is proven by national 
authorities, the affected person has full appeal rights, including the right to stay while the 
appeal is pending.   
 
13 
 
The Joint Report  says that the UK authorities will be able to carry out 
systematic  criminality and security checks on  all applicants for a new 
status in the UK. Is this possible?  
Yes. The context of Brexit is a very special one, because the UK authorities will need to take a 
fundamental decision whether the persons, who will cease to become  a privileged citizen from 
the UK perspective, should have a protected residence status in the UK for the rest of their 
lives. 
In that context , it is appropriate for the UK to establish a new procedure for those seeking to 
obtain that new status in the UK. T his new procedure will nevertheless reflect  the current rules 
of EU free movement law. This means that the UK will be able after Brexit to remove those EU 
offenders who committed their offences before Brexit only where they would be able to remove  
them now .  
 
14 
 
Administrative procedures  
We are hearing a lot about the UK special  status. Will it apply to EU 
citizens after Brexit and what will it mean?  
All EU citizens and their family members residing in the UK will have to apply for UK special  
status after Brexit. While the special  status will be under  UK law, the conditions on which 
citizens will obtain and lose it will not be stricter than those laid down in today's EU free 
movement law for obtaining or losing the right of permanent re sidence.  This means that:  
a) all persons who would qualify for permanent residence under EU free movement law 
will be able to qualify for the UK special  status;  
b) the UK authorities are free to grant special  status also to those who would not qualify 
for perman ent residence under EU free movement law ; 
c) nobody who would not qualify to lose their permanent residence under EU free 
movement law will lose the UK special  status;  
d) EU citizens and their family members will be granted a right to be absent for up to 
five ye ars from the UK without losing their UK special  status ; and  
e) the UK authorities can decide not to withdraw special  status from those who  have 
been absent for more than five years . 
Unlike under current EU free movement law, all EU citizens and their family members residing 
in the UK will be required to obtain special  status – or temporary leave while they accrue the 
five years’ residence required to qualify for it – as the legal basis for their continued residence 
in the UK. The status – and the UK residence document issued to attest that status – will be 
constitutive of their right of residence.  
Will having the UK special  status mean that EU citizens will be losing 
current rights?  
All the conditions for obtaining the UK special  status will be at least as generous as those laid 
down in today's EU free movement law for obtaining right of permanent residence. There will be 
no discretion for the UK authorities to refuse an application on grounds not allowed under 
current EU rules. N obody entitled to protection will be left behind.  
The conditions for losing the UK special  status will be, on one hand, more beneficial compared 
to those in today's EU free movement law as EU citizens and their family members will be given 
an option to lea ve the UK for five years without losing their special  status (current rules provide 
only for two years) . On the other hand, as now, EU citizens can lose their special  status if they 
commit a crime in the UK. Where the crime takes place after withdrawal, th e decision on such 
loss will be taken in accordance with UK national law and all the constraints coming from 
international law instruments applicable in the UK.   
 
15 
 
What will prevent the UK authorities from modifying their laws on 
special  status in the future?  
The Withdrawal Agreement  will make it very clear that once granted to individual citizens, it will 
not be possible to withdraw the UK special  status from individual EU citizens on grounds other 
than those expressly allowed in the Withdrawal Agreement. Rights under the Withdrawal 
Agreement will be binding under international law and EU citizens will be able to directly rely on 
their rights under the Withdrawal Agreement in the UK. T he UK will legislate, so that citizens’ 
rights under the Withdrawal Agree ment are incorporated into UK domestic law.  
The UK legislation enacting  EU citizens' rights provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement will 
prevail over other UK legislation. This means that UK laws cannot ‘accidentally’ take away rights 
protected by the Wit hdrawal Agreement. If the UK Parliament decides  in the future to repeal the 
legislation giving effect to EU citizens' rights in UK law, this repeal would violate the Withdrawal 
Agreement, and would trigger consequences of this violation in accordance with the rules of the 
Withdrawal Agreement itself and international law . 
What will the independent national authority do in the UK?  
In the UK, the implementation and application of the citizens' right part of the Withdrawal 
Agreement will be monitored by an ind ependent national authority; its scope and functions, 
including its role in acting on citizens' complaints, will be discussed between the parties in the 
next phase of the negotiations and reflected in the Withdrawal Agreement. There should be 
regular excha nge of information between the UK Government and the Commission.  In order to 
add real value for citizens, the Commission considers that this independent authority should be 
in particular enabled to receive complaints by citizens who consider that their rig hts under the 
Withdrawal Agreement have been breached and to conduct inquiries holding public authorities 
to account.  
Looking at today's application of EU free movement law in the UK, I am 
concerned that t he new system is not going to work in practice.  
The UK has provided detailed inf ormation on the steps they will take to deliver on the deal. It 
will all be specified in the Withdrawal Agreement . 
To offer concrete safeguards to citizens, we have made sure that all the procedural safeguards 
of the Free Movem ent Directive will apply. Th is means the right to appeal any decision 
restricting residence rights. It also means that the citizen in question maintains all rights under 
the Withdrawal Agreement, until a final decision has been taken, i.e. including final judicial 
decision after an appeal procedure.   
 
16 
 
I am eligible for permanent residence in the UK but I did not bother 
applying for a document certifying permanent residence. Should I do it 
before Brexit?  
You do not need such a document in order to have a right  of permanent residence in the UK 
before Brexit. However, it may be useful to apply for it even now, if you want to apply for 
British citizenship before the new special  status scheme is available, or you want to sponsor 
your non -EU partner’s visa applicati on under the UK’s domestic Immigration Rules.  If you 
simply want to confirm your right to reside in the UK after withdrawal, the UK authorities advise 
you to wait for the new special  status scheme, which they expect to open before the end of 
2018.  
As an EU  citizen residing in the UK, I do not have to apply for a 
residence document now. Will I be obliged to do so after Brexit? And 
why?  
Unlike today, all EU citizens and their family members residing in the UK will be required to 
obtain the special  status under UK law as the legal basis for their continued residence in the UK. 
The status – and the UK residence document issued to attest that status – will be constitutive of 
their right of residence. With the new document, you will be able  to prove your immigrati on 
status not only to the UK authorities or police, but also employers, banks, landlords or anyone 
else. 
I am really afraid that the new administrative procedure the UK 
authorities are designing for EU citizens will be a nightmare. How has 
the EU protected  my rights in the negotiations?  
The UK is  designing a new scheme in which administrative procedures for applications for 
special  status will be transparent, smooth and streamlined , so as to  avoid any unnecessary 
administrative burdens.  It will not replicate the current permanent residence procedures.  
Application forms will be short, simple, user -friendly and adjusted to the context of the 
Withdrawal Agreement.  
The Withdrawal Agreement will specify that the UK cannot require anything mo re than is strictly 
necessary and proportionate to determine whether the criteria for residence have been met. 
The Withdrawal Agreement will contain provisions that follow a similar approach to the 
provisions on evidential requirements in EU free movement law.  
 
17 
 
I believe that the UK administrative immigration procedures are too 
cumbersome. Will there be some rules or safeguards to help me with 
the application?  
The UK authorities will work with applicants for the new UK special  status to help them prove 
their eligibility for it and to avoid any errors or omissions that may impact on the decision  on 
the application . The UK authorities will give applicants the opportunity to furnish supplementary 
evidence or remedy any deficiencies where it appears a simple omis sion has taken place. A 
principle of evidential flexibility will apply, enabling the UK authorities to exercise discretion in 
favour of the applicant where appropriate.  The UK authorities will work with the applicants to 
help them prove their eligibility f or the new UK special  status. Disadvantaged applicants will be 
able to rely on assistance services of the sort that currently operate in the UK, for example in 
local libraries.  
I applied for an EU registration certificate in the UK two years ago. I 
compile d almost one hundred pages of documents to make sure that 
the UK authorities underst ood that I met the conditions. I do not want 
to have to undergo the same again. Will it be different this time?  
Yes. The UK’s new system for special  status will not  require anything more than is strictly 
necessary and proportionate to determine whether the criteria for residence have been met. 
The Withdrawal Agreement will contain provisions that follow a similar approach to the 
provisions on evidential requirements in EU free movement law. At the same time, the UK 
authorities will seek to use evidence already available to them (such as records on taxes paid 
on wages)  to reduce the evidence applicants will need to provide . 
In other words, applicants will  only have to provide the minimum evidence necessary  to show 
that they qualify for the new UK special  status  (for a worker this means an ID, proof that he or 
she has worked in the UK for five years in the past and proof that he or she continues to reside 
in the UK ) and nothing else.  
It is not clear to me which criteria the UK authorities will use to decide 
on the new status for resident EU citizens. Can you please explain?  
The criteria for EU citizens to obtain a new status in the UK will be no more stringent than those 
laid down today in EU free movement law. This will ensure that all EU citizens who would qualify 
for a right of residence under EU free movement law will qualify for a status in the UK and that 
EU citizens who would qualify for a right of permanent residen ce under EU free movement law 
will qualify for a permanent status in the UK.   
 
18 
 
What will be the deadline for EU citizens to apply for a new status in 
the UK?  
EU citizens and their family members will have at least two years to apply for a new status in 
the U K. During this time period and until their applications are decided, they will enjoy the ir 
current residence rights.  
Will there be any safeguards for those who miss the deadline?  
The UK authorities will take a proportionate approach to those EU citizens an d their family 
members who miss the deadline for application where there is a good reason.  Those whose out-
of-time application s are not accepted by the UK authorities will still be able to ask an 
independent UK court to look into the refusal.  
Some immigration applications are very costly in the UK. How much will 
the UK authorities charge EU citizens and their family members 
applying for a new status after Brexit?  
New UK residence documents will be issued free of charge (for those relying on a valid 
permanent residence document issued under EU free movement law before Brexit)  or for a 
charge not exceeding that imposed on nationals for the issuing of similar documents (you can 
expect to pay  no more than  the charge that British citizens pay for passport s: this stands at 
approximately £70 today ).  
Today, EU citizens can appeal against decisions of the UK authorities. 
Will this right be protected after Brexit as well?  
Yes, this right is fully replicated by the Joint Report . 
What will happen to those EU citizens whose applications for a new 
status are refused by the UK authorities? Will they be able to stay while 
their appeal is pending?  
EU citizens whose applications for a new UK status after Brexit are refused will be able t o seek 
judicial redress against the refusal.  They will keep their right of residence until the decision – or 
appeal – becomes final. As is currently the case under EU free movement law,  the UK 
authorities will in exceptional cases be able to remove rejected applicants even before a final 
judgment has been handed down , but they must not prevent the individual from submitting his 
defence in person except in exceptional circumstances.   
 
19 
 
I already have a document certifying permanent residence issued to m e 
by the UK authorities last year. I sincerely hope that persons like me 
will be allowed to stay without any hassle.  
Yes. You will have to apply for a new permanent status in the UK (special  status)  but, as you 
have already obtained permanent residence in the UK under existing EU free movement law, 
the administrative procedure will be very light -touch and you will just have to present an ID , 
declare any criminal convictions  and show that you continue to reside in the UK. Your new UK 
residence document will be issued free of charge.   
 
20 
 
Social security  
I am British and I work in Spain. I will soon reach my pension age. 
What will happen with my state pension rights after Brexit?  
Nothing will happen to your state pension and everything will  be as now. You will be entitled to 
your pension under the same conditions as today, the amount will be calculated according to 
the same rule and you can even have it exported and uprated to another  EU state should you 
decide to settle elsewhere.  
I have re tired and now receive a state pension from both the UK and 
Slovenia where I used to work before. Will something happen to my 
pension after Brexit?  
Nothing will happen to your pension. You will continue receiving a state pension both from the 
UK and Sloveni a as you were receiving before.  
In the past, I worked for 12 years in the UK. I have moved and now 
work in Austria. Once I retire (around 2035), what will happen with the 
periods of work – and insurance – in the UK and Austria?  
Your periods of work will st ill count and once you retire, you will receive your UK pension (or, 
rather, its part corresponding to the 12 years of employment) and your Austrian pension (the 
part corresponding to the number of years you have worked in Austria)  under the same 
condition s that apply currently in the EU.  
I worked all my life in the UK and have now retired in France.  I am 
worried that my UK state pension will no longer be uprated after Brexit.  
The Joint Report makes it clear that all social security benefits, such as old age pension, will 
continue to be uprated in accordance with national rules.  
Should I decide to leave the UK in the future, will I be able to take my 
social security benefits with me?  
If you are protected by the Withdrawal Agreement, all relevant social security benefits will 
continue to be exportable both to EU states and the UK, as they are under the current EU rules.  
I live and work in the UK. Today, I am able to get healthcare in a local 
hospital without any hassle. Will this change?  
There wil l be no change after Brexit.   
 
21 
 
After working all my life in Belgium, I have retired to live in the UK. 
Today, I am able to get healthcare in a local hospital without any 
hassle. Will this change?  
There will be no change after Brexit. Belgium will continue to  reimburse the costs of your future 
healthcare, as it does today.  
I currently rely on my EHIC to ensure I can access healthcare when I 
am abroad . Will this still apply?  
If you are abroad on Brexit day, whether on a temporary stay or by virtue of residence,  you will 
be covered by the EHIC s cheme for as long as you continue to be in a cross-border situation.   
 
22 
 
Professional qualifications  
What are professional qualifications?  
Professional qualifications are qualifications that a person n eeds to possess by virtue of 
legislative, regulatory or administrative p rovisions in order to access or pursue a professional 
activity or group of professional activities. For instance, the use of a professional title (for 
example, doctor, architect, lawye r) is limited by legislative, regulatory or administrative 
provisions to holders of a given professional qualification constitutes a mode of pursuit. 
Professional qualifications can include diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal 
qualifications, as well as attestations of competence and/or professional experience.  
What happens today when a person moves from one Member State to 
another Member State with his or her qualifications?  
EU citizens have the right to pursue a profession, on  an employed or self -employed basis, in a 
Member State other than the one in which they obtained their qualification.  Member States are 
obliged to consider the qualifications obtained in other Member States; and in a few professions 
(doctors, nurses, dent al practitioners, veterinary surgeons, midwives, pharmacists and 
architects) there is an automatic recognition system based on common minimum training 
conditions. The Member State where recognition is sought must issue a decision providing for 
the recognit ion of the qualifications in question or reject the application – such a decision is 
subject to appeal under national law.  
This Union regime does not apply to applications made by non-EU nationals . Qualifications 
acquired in non-EU countries are covered by  the Union regime only in the event that they have 
been assimilated to Union qualifications after three  years of exercise in the Member State which 
first recognised them.  
I am a  British  architect living and working in Estonia . Will I be able to 
continue to  practise my profession?  
Yes. If you have had a professional qualification recognised in the country where you currently 
reside or, for frontier workers, where you work, you will be able to continue to rely on the 
recognition decision there for the purpose  of carrying out your professional activities.  
I have applied for recognition of my qualification. What will happen if I 
do not receive a decision before Brexit?  
If you have applied for recognition, before the specified date, to a competent authority of the 
Member State where you currently reside or, for frontier workers,  where you  work, the 
procedure for the recognition of those qualifications should be completed under the Union rules  
 
23 
 
applicable before the specified date. This should guarantee the smooth  completion of the 
procedure and a positive outcome, so long as your request was justified.  
 