 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT  
FOR DOMESTIC WORKERS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 
 CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT  
 
 
This Agreement done on………………………………..… between:  
  
Name:…………………………………………………………  Surname:……………………………………………………………  
  
Identity Card Number:  ……… ………………………..  
  
Address:1.  ..………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..  
                  (Employer’s primary residence address)  
 
              2. ……………………………………………………………………………………………... ...............................................  
                  (Employer’s secondary residence address)  
 
Telephone Number   ………………………  Mobile Phone Number…………………………  
  
Employer’s Registration Number (Social Insurance):  ………………………………………….  
  
hereinafter in this Agreement referred to as “the Employer”, on the  one part  
  
and   
 
Name :……………………... ………………………………………….  Surname :………………… ………………………………………..  
  
Nationality :…………………………………… ……………………..  Gender………………………………………… …………………….  
  
Passport Number :………………….. ……………………………  Address Abroad :………………. ……………………………….  
  
hereinafter i n this Agreement referred to as “the Employee”, on the other part, includes the following:  
 
1.  Post/ Occupation,  duration of this agreement and terms of employment : 
 
A.  Position  
 
The Employer shall employ the Employee as a domestic worker and the Empl oyee accepts and agrees to 
such employment, in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement. Housework 
means every housework performed in the Employer’s primary residence and/or any secondary residence.  
 
B. Duration of this Agreem ent 
 
This Agreement shall be in effect for………..………  (months/years) from  …………. (date) to……………….(date), 
subject to prior termination under the terms and conditions provided by this Agreement.  
 
C.  Terms of Employment  
 
(a)  
  The Employee’s entry, residenc e and employment shall be subject to the provisions of the Aliens  
and Immigration Law and the relevant Regulations, as they may be amended from time to time.  
 
(b)   
(b) The Employer is obliged together with the application for the issuing or residence and e mployment 
permit for the  Employee, to submit a Declaration to cover the cost of return of a third country  
3 
 national in case of repatriation.  
 
(c)  The Employee shall, upon arrival to Cyprus, and before he/she is granted a Residence and 
Employment Permit, unde rgo medical exam inations to verify that he/she is free of contagious 
diseases. The costs shall be paid by the Employer.  
  
(d)  This Agreement shall be terminated in the event that the Director of the of Civil Registry and 
Migration Department declines to gra nt a Residence/W ork Permit to the Employee, in accordance 
to the Aliens and Immigration Law . 
  
(e)  The terms contained in the Residence/Work Permit shall form part of this Agreement and shall be 
binding on both contracting parties.  
  
(f)  Export of currency s hall be subject to the provisions of the Exchange Control Law, Cap. 199, 
including any additional conditions which may be imposed by the Central Bank of Cyprus.  
  
(g)  Any dispute arising in connection to this Agreement shall be governed by the legislation o f the 
Republic o f Cyprus in force on the day when the dispute arises.  
  
2. The Employee:  
  
(a) Shall not, while this Agreement and his/her Residence and Work Permit are in force, be entitled to 
perform any other duties, nor shall he/she be entitled to wor k at the same ti me with another 
employer other than the specific household.  
  
(b) Shall perform his/her duties and/or other related duties assigned to him/her and shall use the best 
of his/her abilities, skills and experience, in accordance to the Employ er’s instruction s and/or any of 
the Employer’s authorised representatives, subject to the terms of this Agreement.  
  
(c) Shall not divulge or disclose at any time or in any way communicate any confidential information 
and any other matters concerning the  Employer.  
  
(d) Shall conduct himself/herself at all times with decency and propriety and in particular he/she shall 
obey and comply with the laws and regulations of the Republic of Cyprus . 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
4 
 2.1 Remuneration, Hours of Work and f ringe B enefits  
 
A.  Remuneration/allowances and working hours  
 
The Employer shall pay the Employee, during the term of this Agreement, a monthly gross  salary of 
€……………  payable at the end of each month . 
 
Of the above amount a percentage of ………….% shall b e deduc ted for Social Insurance purpose s together 
with any deductions provided for accommodation and meals and 50% of the cost for health insurance.  
 
The Employee shall work for 6 days per week for 7 hours per day, either during the day or night as may 
be requi red by the Employer from time to time. The Employer shall be obliged to keep record of the 
working hours . 
 
B.  Annual Leave  
 
The Employee shall  be entitled to twenty -four ( 24) working days annual leave with full pay, in accordance 
to the Annual Lea ve Laws  of 1967 to 2002, as these are amended from time to time . 
 
C. Sick Leave  
 
The Employee shall be entitled to a thirty ( 30) day sick leave with f ull pay. The Employer shall be obliged 
to pay the difference between the sick leave allowance paid by the  Social  Insurance Services and the total 
monthly salary. The first three ( 3) days of sick leave shall not be compensated except where the 
Employee is h ospitalized in a private clinic/hospital.  
 
D. Public Holidays  
 
The Employee shall be entitled to the fol lowing official public holidays with full pay:  
  
1. 1st of January  
2. 6th of January  
3. Easter Saturday  
4. Easter Monday  
5. 1st of May  
6. 15th of August  
7. 1st of October  
8. 25th of December  
9. 26th of December  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
5 
 3. The Employer:  
 
A. Accommoda tion and Food  
 
The Employer is obliged to provide to the Employee suitable accommodation inside his/her house 
or elsewhere and food. Where the Employer is providing accommodation and food, he/she is 
entitled to deduct out of the gross salary of the  Emplo yee 10% for accommodation and 15% for 
food respectively.  
 
B. Insurance  
 
The Employer shall be obliged to:  
 
(a)       Have an Employers Liabili ty Insurance . 
  
    (b) 
 Provide to the Employee primary and secondary medical  care  that will al so cove r the cost for 
the transportation of the mortal remai ns. The cost for the health insurance shall be paid 
equally by the Empl oyer and the Employee. The way in which the contribution will b e paid by 
the Employee, shall be agreed upon with the Employer and may be p aid in monthly 
installments or in one payment as a lump sum.  
In case that the Emp loyee is register ed in the  General Heal thcare System (G ESY) , a 
private insurance  to cover the cos t for the trans portation of  the mortal remains should 
also be su bmitte d.   
 
C. Bank Account  
 
The Employer is obliged to open a bank account in Euro solely and exclusively credited in the name 
of the Employee, for the purpose of depositing the Employee’s  salary at the end o f each month. A 
copy of the bank account must be sub mitted t o the Civil Registry and Migration Department  and/or 
the Aliens and Immigration Unit of the Police and the competent Services of the Ministry of Labour, 
Welfare and Social Insu rance, whenever requ ested . 
 
D. Deductions  
 
The Employer shall not deduc t, eithe r directly or indirectly, from the Employee’s salary:  
 
(a)  
 any fees or any part thereof paid / to be paid to the Government of the Republic of Cyprus in 
respect to the issu ance of a Residence and Employment Permit,  
  
(b)  all or any part of t he Emplo yee’s travelling expenses  of first arrival  to the Republic of Cyprus  
and repatriation in the framework of this Agreement , 
  
(c)  any fees or any part thereof paid to an Emplo yment Agency . 
 
E. Social Insurance  
 
The Employer shall be obliged to pay regular ly to the Social Insurance Fund the contribution for the 
Employee’ benefit and all other contributions to any other Funds for which the Social Insurance 
Services are responsible to c ollect, in compliance to the provisions of the relev ant Social Insurance 
Legislation. The Employer will undertake to make the necessary arrangements with the District 
Social Insurance Office.  
 
 
  
6 
 4. Termination of Contract  
 
The Contract o f Employment may be terminated:  
 
(a) Upon a mutual agreement between the E mployee and the Empl oyer, provided that a  release 
document is completed and signed by both parties, in the presence of witnesses. The mutual 
termination of the contract may be done at any time after a mut ual agreement.  
 
The release agreement allows the emp loyee to search for employment for a period of one (1) 
month. During the aforementioned period the employee may stay and work at the house of 
his/her employer, unless there is a mutual  agreement for immed iate termination. In such a case 
the Employee shall be obliged to inform  the District Aliens and Immigration Unit in respect to 
his/her temporary address.   
 
(b) Upon a one -month (1) notice given by either party under the terms and condit ions of the 
Terminat ion of Employment Law s of 1967 to 2002, as these are  amended from time t o time. 
During the notice period, the Employer shall facilitate the Employee while searching for 
employment.  
 
(c) Forthwith without notice, in accordance with sectio n 5 of the Terminati on of Employment Law.  
 
(d) Where the employee is absen t from his work due to sick leave , which is not attributed to an 
accident covered under the Industrial Accidents Act, for more than one month. In such a case, 
the Employer shall have t he right to terminat e the employment of the Employee and to make 
arrange ments for the Employ ee’s repatriation if his/her state of health so permits. The 
Employer shall have no other obligations against the Employee.  
 
(e) In the case of a labour dispute betwe en the Employee and the Employer.  In such a case one of 
the two parties  or both parties sepa rately, may submit in writing a relevant complaint to the 
District Aliens and Immigration Unit of the Police, as well as the Department of Labour Relations 
for examination  by the Labo ur Disputes Committee.  In the case of criminal offe nces, all 
complaints s hall be submitted to the Police Station of the area where the alien is residing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
7 
  
 
In witness whereof the contracting parties have set their signature in the pre sence of witnesses o n 
the date first above mentioned.  
 
Witnesses:  
 The Contracting Parties:  
1. (Signature)…………………………….  
 
  (Full Name )…………………………..  1. Employer…………………………………  
 
(Signature) …………………………………  
 
(Full Name )………………………………  
 
 
2. (S ignature)…………………………….  
 
  (Full Name )…………………………..  2. Employee …………………………………  
 
(Signature) …………………… ……………  
 
(Full Name )………………………………  
 
 
 
 
EMPLOYER’S STATEMENT  OF COMPLIANCE IN ACCORDANCE TO THE EMPLOYER’S OBLIGATION  TO 
INFORM EMPLOYEES OF THE TERMS  OF THEIR CONTRACT OR WORK RELATIONSHIP LAW OF 2000  
 
I, ……………… ………………… ……………………… in my capacity as Employer in t his Contract of Employment, 
hereby declare that I will comply with the provisions of the Employer’s Obligation to Inform 
Employees of the  Terms of their  Contract or Work R elationship, Law of 2000, and I will supply the 
Employee with a copy of the Contract of Employment . 
 
Date:……… ……. Employer:  
 
 (Signature)……………………………….  
 
 (Full Name )…………………………….  
 
 
 
 