 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
 
 
                                                        
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CYPRUS DIGITAL N OMAD  VISA  SCHEME  
FOR FOREI NG NATIONA LS OF NON -EU COUNTRIES  
 
  
2 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
_________________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
CYPRUS  “DIGITAL NOMA D VISA ”  
 
 
DIGITAL NOMAD VISA SCHEME  | January 2022  
 January  2022 
 
 
2 
 INTR ODUCTION  
 
With  its Decisio n of October  15, 2021 , the Council  of Ministers  approved  the introduction  of the 
Digital Nomad  Visa Scheme  in Cyprus , with a ceiling of 100 residence permits  to be issued .  
 
 
WHAT IS TH E "CYPRUS  DIGITAL NOMAD  VISA " 
The "Cyprus  Digital  Nom ad Visa" Scheme allow s nationals from non -EU and non -EEA countries , who can 
perform their wor k location -independently  using telecommunication s technology , to reside  temporarily  in 
Cyprus  and work for an  employer regis tered abroad or perform work through telecommuni cations  technology 
for companies or clients located abroad.   
 
The Sc heme’s goal is  to stren gthen Cyprus as a center for  the provision of electronic services, where in 
combination with the other advantages offered by Cyprus, the attraction of digital nomads will contribute to 
the development of the business ecosystem and consequently to the econo mic development of the count ry. 
The introduction of the "Cyprus Digital Nomad Visa  Scheme " is included in the  Strategy for Attracting 
Businesses for Activities or/and Expansion of their Activities in Cyprus.  
 
WHO CAN BENEFIT  
Non-EU or non-EEA nationals who: 
• Can perform work  remo tely through tele communications technology ;  
• Are employe d in a company  registered  abroad, for which  they can work  location -independently , or 
are self-employed offering services remotely for clients located abroad ; 
• Can prove  that they have stable and sufficient monthly net income  of at least € 3500  (after the 
deduction of contributions and taxes ). 
 
 
WHAT  ARE THE BENEFITS  
Individuals that are granted with a Digital Nomad residence  permit will benefit from the following : 
• Right of residence for a year in Cyprus , with a possibility  of renew al for further two years.   
• Right  of residence  for family  members , for the same  period  as the Digital  Nomad , witho ut the ri ght to 
be employed of perform economic activity in Cyprus .  
• If they reside in the Republic  for one of more  periods that in total exceed  183 days  within the same 
tax year, then they are conside red tax residen ts of Cyprus , provided they are not tax residents  in any 
other co untry.  
 
 
PROCEDURE  TO BE FOLLOW ED 
Individu als who meet  the above  requirements  should  follow the steps below: 
 
Step  1: Entry in the Repu blic of Cyprus  
 
• The applicant  enters  Cyprus  with a tourist  visa (where  necessary ). 
• Individu als already  residing  legally  in Cyprus , please follow Step 2 .  
 
Step 2: Submit  an applica tion for a residence perm it  January  2022 
 
 
3 
  
• Within  3 months  of arrival , the applicant  should  submit the relevant  application  at the Civil Registry 
and Migration  Department  in Nicosia , to be granted a residence permit , by paying the corresp onding 
fees.  
• In case  the applicant  legally  resides  in Cypr us under  a different status, he/she has the right to submit 
the relevant  application  to be granted a residence permit  as a Digital Nomad , at the Civil Registry 
and Migration  Department  in Nicosia . 
• The applica nt must  state  in the appl ication the type of his/her empl oyment , i.e., self-employe d or 
employed  for an employer  registered  abroad , and prove his/her  monthly  net income . 
• The app lication must be accompanied with all necessary documents,  and, during its submission , the 
biometric data (photograph and finge rprints) will be taken as well as the signature of the applicant.  
 
In case of approval, a residence permit is issued  valid for one  year and the applicant is notified accordingly. 
In case of rejection, the applicant will be informed accordingly.  
 
 
 
Step 3: Submit an  Application for the Renewal of a Residence Permit in Republic  
• At least one  (1) month before the residence permit’s expiration date , the applicant should apply to 
the Civil Registry and Migration  Department  in Nicosia  for renewal and pay the corre sponding fees.  
• The application must be accompanied by all necessary documents  and during the application’s 
submission the biometric data (photograph and fingerprints) will be taken as well as the applicant’s 
signature.  
 
 
In case of approval, a residence pe rmit is i ssued  valid for a maximum of two  (2) years and the applicant is 
notified accordingly. In case of rejection, the applicant will be informed accordingly.  
 