1 
  
SCHEME FOR NATURALISATION OF INVESTORS IN CYPRUS BY EXCEPTION  
on the basis of subsection (2) of section 111A  
of the Civil Registry Laws of 2002 -2015  
 
 
Guidelines for the Submission of an application for the acquisition  
of an Immigration Permit   
 
 
The Decision of the Council of Ministers dated 13.9.2016 provides that the investor and  
his/her  adult  family members , prior to their  naturalization as  Cypriot citizen s, must hold a 
residence permit in Cyprus. If the applicant (either investor or family member) does not 
already hold a residence p ermit, he/she may apply for an Immigration P ermit on the basis 
of Regulation 6 (2) of the Aliens and Immigration Law, simultane ously with the application 
for n aturalization.  In relation to the submission of an Immigration Permit application solely 
for the purposes of acquiring the Cypriot citizenship, in accordance with the provisions of 
this Scheme, there are no other conditions than those stated in the Scheme.  
 
 In the case where  the investor does not already hold a residence permit he/she will need 
to submit an application for acquiring an Immigration Permit, right after the submission of 
Naturalization application, following the procedure that is described below.  
 
It is noted that the procedure described below needs to be followed for the submission of 
the citizenship application of the investor’s adult family members  (i.e. parents and 
financially dependent adult children of the investor  as defined by the abovementioned 
Decision of the Council of Ministers dated 13.9.2016 ) that do not already hold a residence 
permit. The legislation pertaining to the grant of the Immigration Permit provides that only 
the spouse/ partner and minor children  (under the age of eighteen) of an Immigration 
Permit holder are considered dependent family members and therefore they may acquire 
the Immigration Permit without the submission of separate applications. All the other 
family members (i.e. parents and finan cially dependent adult children of the investor) need 
to submit separate Immigration Permit applications.  
 
However, it goes without saying that concerning the acquisition of the Cypriot citizenship, 
each person needs to file a separate individual applicati on.     
 
In the case where an Immigration Permit application is required to be submitted along 
with the Naturalization application the below procedure needs to be followed:  
 
I. Submission of the Citizenship application at the Ministry of Interior  
 
The submitted application needs to be complete and accompanied with all the 
necessary documents (Concerning the application for Naturalization, prior to its 
submission, please see the relevant “Guidelines”  document s that can be found on 
the website of the Ministry of Interior). Provided that the application is complete 2 
 and accompanied by all the necessary documents the “ Confirmation of Submission 
of Application for Naturalization by Exception ” (not the same thing as the fees 
payment receipt) will be handed over to the applicant or his/her representative. 
This “Confirmation” will be used for the submission of the Immigration Permit 
application at the Civil Registry and Migration Department.    
 
II. Submission of the Immigration Permit application at the Civil Reg istry and 
Migration Department  
 
For the submission  of the Immigration Permit application the following documents 
need to be filed:  
 
1. Form  MIP1  
2. Clean Criminal Record Certificate  
3. Copy of Passport  
4. Marriage Certificate/ Civil Partnership Certificate (where applicable)  
5. “Confirmation of Submission of Application for Naturalization by 
Exception” by the Ministry of Interior  
 
Having in mind that the documents 2 -4 would have already been submitted in their 
original form at the Ministry of Interior along with the N aturalization application, it 
is accepted to file copies of the submitted documents.  
 
The Marriage Certificate or the Civil Partnership Certificate will need to be 
submitted only if the spouse or partner of the investor wishes to acquire the 
Immigration Pe rmit as the investor’s dependent.  
 
For the submission of the application for Immigration Permit an appointment needs 
to be arranged beforehand calling the phone numbers 22403921 and 22403943.  
 
III. Collectio n of applicant’s biometric data  
 
For the issuance  of the Immigration Permit the collection of the applicant’s 
biometric data (fingerprints and photograph) and signature is mandatory.  In order 
for the biometric data to be collected the applicant is required to appear in person 
at the Civil Registry and Mi gration Department. Moreover the applicant needs to 
present an original travel document.   
 
IV. Issuance of the Immigration Permit  
 
After the collection  of the biometric data, the Immigration Permit (card) is issued 
within five working days.  
 
It is noted that the applicant cannot be considered as a holder of a residence 
permit, unless the aforementioned procedure is completed and the Immigration 
Permit (card) issued .   3 
  
Moreover, it goes without  saying that the applicant is obliged to pay all the fees 
required for the submission of the application and the issuance of the 
Immigration Permit. 
 
Finally, it needs to be noted that, when the Naturalization procedure is completed and the 
applicant acquired the Cypriot citizenship, the Immigration Permit will be immediately 
cancelled. Moreover, if the application for naturalization i s rejected for any reason, the 
Immigration P ermit, obtained in accordance with the provisions of the Decision  of the 
Council of Ministers dated 13.9.2013 , will be canceled immediately.  
 
 
 
Ministry of Interior  
20.10.2016  