 
 
 
193(I) of 2020  
 
THE RIGHT OF EUROPEAN UNION CITIZENS AND CERTAIN 
NATIONALS OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND  
THEIR FAMILY MEMBERS TO MOVE AND RESIDE FREELY  
WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS 
(AMENDMENT) LAW OF 2020  
 
(English translation)  
 
 
 
 
Office of the Law Commissioner  
Nicosia  
November 2021  
 
 
ΓΕΝ(Α) -L.163            ISBN 978-9925 -570-36-2    
 
 
NICOSIA  
________________________ ______________________  
PRINTED AT THE PRINTING OFFICE OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  
Price:        
ii 
 CONTENTS  
 
  Page  
  
Note for the Reader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
iii 
   
 The Right of European Union Citizens and Certain Nationals 
of the United Kingdom and Their Family Members to Move 
and Reside Freely Within the Territory of the Republic of 
Cyprus (Amendment) Law of 2020 ( Translation i n English) 
…………………………………………………………………… 
  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
                                                   iii 
  
NOTE FOR THE READER  
 
The publication at hand by the Office of the Law Commissioner is an English 
translation of the Right of European Union Citizens and Certain Nationals of the 
United Kingdom and Their Family Members to Move and Reside Freely Within the Territory of the Republic of Cyprus (Amendment) Law of  2020 . 
However useful the English translation of the Law is in practice, it does not replace the original text of the Law since only the text published in the Official 
Gazette of the Republic is  authentic.  
The Office of the Law Commissioner shall not be under any liability to any person or organisation in respect of any loss or damage, including 
consequential loss or damage, however caused, which may be incurred or 
arises directly or indirectly from reliance on information in this publication.  
Copyright © Office of the Law Commissioner, Nicosia 2021  
Reproduction authorised without prior application. Reference to the source will be appreciated.  
 
 1 
 Number  193(Ι) of 2020  
A LAW TO AMEND  THE RIGHT OF EUROPEAN  UNION 
CITIZENS AND THEIR FAMILY MEMBERS TO MOVE 
AND RESIDE FREELY WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF 
THE REPUBLIC LAWS OF 2007 TO 2017  
  
  
Preamble.  
Official Journal of 
the EU: L 29, 
31.1.2020,   
p. 7. For the purposes of better application of articles 9 to 19 of the Agreement on 
the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
from the European Union and the European Atomic E nergy Community,  
 The House of Representatives enacts as follows:  
 
Short title.  
7(Ι) of 2007  
181(Ι) of 2011 
8(Ι) of 2013  
67(Ι) of 2013  
77(Ι) of 2015 
28(I) of 2017.  1.  This Law may be cited as The Right of European Union Citizens and 
Certain Nationals of the United Kingdom and their Family Members to Move 
and Reside Freely within the territory of the Republic of Cyprus (Amendment) 
Law of 2020 and shall be read together  with the Right of European Union 
Citizens and their Family Members to Move and Reside Freely within the 
territory of the Republic of Cyprus Laws of 2007 to 2017 (hereinafter referred 
to as “the principal law”) and the principal law and this Law will be jo intly 
referred to as The Right of European Union Citizens and Certain Nationals of 
the United Kingdom and their Family Members to Move and Reside Freely 
within the territory of the Republic of Cyprus Laws of 2007 to 2020.  
 
Amendment of 
section 1 of the 
principal law.  2. Section 1 of the principal law is amended by the addition, immediately 
after the word “Citizens” (second line), the words “and Certain Nationals of the 
United Kingdom”.  
 
 3.  The principal law is amended by the addition, immediately after Part VII 
thereof, of the following new Part and the following new sections, and the 
renumbering, immediately after, of this Part VIII to Part IX:  
 PART VIII  
PROVISIONS FOR THE RIGHT OF RESIDENCE FOR CERTAIN 
NATIONALS OF THE UNITED KINGDOM  2 
   
 Interpretative  
provisions.  35Α.  For the purposes of this Part -  
 
  “Beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement" are nationals of 
the United Kingdom who, prior to the end of the transition 
period, exercised their right to reside or work in the Republic in 
accordance with the provisions of the Withdrawal Agreement 
and this L aw and based on Union law and, following the 
expiration of said period, continue to reside or work in the 
Republic and derive the right of residence in the Republic 
pursuant to Articles 9 to19 of Part Two of the Withdrawal 
Agreement·  
 
 Official 
Journal of the 
EU: L 157, 
15.6.2002,  
p. 1∙  
L 115, 
29.4.2008,  
p. 1. “Regulation (EC) no. 1030/2002” means the Act of the 
European Community titled “Council Regulation (EC) no. 
1030/2002, of 13th June 2002, laying down a uniform format 
for residence permits for third -country nationals”, as most 
recently amended by Council Regulation (EC) no. 380/2008, 
of 18th April 2008, and as further amended from time to time or 
replaced;  
 
  "family member" shall have the meaning assigned to it by the 
Withdrawal Agreement;  
 
  “transition period” shall have the meaning assigned to it by the 
Withdrawal Agreement;  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Official Journal 
of the EU: L 29, 
31.1.2020,  
p. 7. "Withdrawal Agreement" shall mean the Agreement on the 
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland from the European Union, published in the 
Official Journal of the European Union on 31 January 2020.  
 
 Purpose of  
this Part. 35B.  The purpose of this Part is to define -  3 
   
  (a)   
  the terms and formalities  governing the exercise of the 
right of free movement and residence in the Republic by 
the beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement and their 
family members ∙  
  (b)   
  the terms and formalities  governing the exercise of the 
right of permanent residence in the Republic by the 
beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement and their 
family members ∙ and  
  (c)  the restrictions that may be imposed on the rights referred 
to in paragraphs (a) and (b) ab ove, for reasons of public 
order, public security or public health.  
 
 Scope of this 
Part.  
 35C. This Part shall apply to the beneficiaries of the 
Withdrawal Agreement and their family members:  
 
  Provided that the beneficiaries of the Withdrawal 
Agreement who hold documents issued in accordance with the 
other provisions of this Law are not obliged to replace them, 
unless those  have an expiration date.  
 
 Right of entry.  
 
Official Journal 
of the EU: L 77, 
23.3.2016,  
p. 1. 35D - (1) Subject to the provisions on travel documents of 
Regulation (EU) 2016/399 of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 9 March 2016 on a Union Code on the rules 
governing the movement of persons across borders 
(Sche ngen Borders Code), which are applicable to national 
border controls, any beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement 
who holds a valid identity card or passport, as well as his/her 
respective family members who are not nationals of the United 
Kingdom, may ent er the Republic provided they hold a valid 
passport.  4 
        (2) For beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement and their 
respective family members who are nationals of the United 
Kingdom, no entry visa requirement or other equivalent 
formality may be imposed.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Official Journal of 
the EU: L 303, 
28.11.20 18, 
p. 39.      (3) Family members of beneficiaries of the Withdrawal 
Agreement who are not nationals of the United Kingdom are 
only required to have an entry visa, in accordance with the 
provisions of Regulation (EU) 2018/1806 of the European 
Parliament and of the C ouncil of 14 November 2018 listing the 
third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas 
when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals 
are exempt from that requirement, as amended from time to 
time, or as requested in accordance  with the provisions of the 
Aliens and Immigration Law regarding the obligation for an 
entry visa, as the case may be:  
 
  Provided that possession of a residence document by a 
family member of a beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement 
who is not a United  Kingdom national, which has been issued 
on the basis of the Withdrawal Agreement as provided for in 
section 35I, exempts the entry visa requirement:  
 
  Provided, furthermore, that an equivalent residence 
document issued by the competent authorities of the United 
Kingdom does not exempt said family members from the 
above obligation.  
 
 Right of Exit.  35E. Subject to the provisions on travel documents of 
Regulation (EU) 2016/399 of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 9 March 2016 on a Union Code on the rules 
governing the movement of persons across borders 
(Schengen Borders Code), which are ap plicable to national 
border controls, as well as subsection (4) of section 5, any 
beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement who holds a valid 5 
 identity card or passport, as well as his / her family members 
who are not nationals of the United Kingdom may leave  the 
country to go to another member state, provided they hold a 
valid passport.   
 
 Residence right 
not exceeding 
three months.  35F - (1) The beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement 
shall have the right to reside in the Republic for a period not 
exceed ing three months without any terms or formalities, 
provided they arrive before the end of the transition period, 
apart from the requirement to hold a valid identity card or 
passport.  
 
  (2) The provisions of sub section (1) shall also apply to the 
family members of the beneficiaries of the Withdrawal 
Agreement who hold a valid passport, are not nationals of the 
United Kingdom, and accompany or arrive to meet the 
beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement before the end of th e 
transition period:  
 
  Provided that children born after the end of the transition 
period retain the same rights.  
 
 Residence right 
exceeding three 
months.  35G - (1) The beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement 
have the right to reside in the Republic for a period exceeding 
three months, provided that they entered the Republic before 
the end of the transition period.  
  (2) The beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement referred 
to in sub section (1) are required to fulfil similar conditions as 
those referred to in section 9 for citizens of the Union.  
 
  (3) The right of residence provided for in sub section (1) 
shall also extend to the family members of the beneficiary of 
the Withdrawal Agreement, as long as they have entered the 
Republic before the end of the transition period to meet the 
beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement, and provided they 6 
 fulfil simi lar conditions as those stated in section 9 for family 
members of a European Union citizen:  
 
  Provided that children born after the end of the transition 
period retain the same rights.  
 
 Registration of 
a beneficiary of 
the Withdrawal 
Agreement and 
respective 
family members.  35Η - (1) Notwithstanding the relevant corresponding 
provisions for the registration of the Aliens and Immigration 
Law and the Regulations issued pursuant thereof, as well as 
the Civil Registry Law, beneficiaries of the Withdrawal 
Agreement and their respe ctive family members, who have 
also arrived in the Republic before the end of the transition 
period, are required to register at the Civil Registry and 
Migration Department for the duration of their residence in the 
Republic that exceeds the three months, in accordance with 
the provisions of this section, within four months from the date 
of their arrival in the Republic.   
 
  (2) The competent authority shall grant a residence 
document, in a form decided by the said authority, to the 
beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement, valid for five years, 
in accordance with Regulation (EC) No. 1030/2002, in which 
the name of the party concerned, the date of registration and 
the validity period of the document shall be indicated.  
 
  (3) The residence document issued under subsection  (2) 
shall state that it is issued in accordance with paragraph 4 of 
Article 18 of the Withdrawal Agreeme nt.  
 
  (4) For the granting of the residence document referred to 
in sub section (2), it is required to submit an application in the 
form decided by the competent authority and to pay a fee of 
thirty euros (€30), and to provide documents corresponding to 
those referred to in sub section (4) of section10, as the case 
maybe, in accordance with the provisions of section 35G.  7 
  
  (5) For the granting of a residence document to respective 
family members of the beneficiary of the Withdrawal 
Agreement, who are nationals of the United Kingdom, it is 
required to submit an application in the form decided by the 
competent authority and to pay a fee of thirty euros (€30), and 
to provide documents corresponding to those stated in 
subsection (6) of section 10, where appropriate, in accordance 
with the provisions of section 35G.   
 
 Residence 
document for 
family members 
of beneficiaries 
of the 
Withdrawal 
Agreement who 
are not 
nationals of the 
United 
Kingdom.  35I - (1) For family members of a beneficiary of the 
Withdrawal Agreement who are not nationals of the United 
Kingdom, a residence document shall be granted by the 
competent authority, valid for five years, in accordance with 
Regulation (EC) 1030/2002, in which the name of the  party 
concerned, the date of registration, the validity of the document 
and that this is issued in accordance with paragraph 4 of article 
18 of the Withdrawal Agreement, are indicated.  
  (2) The deadline provided for submitting the application for 
the granting of the residence document is four months from the 
date of arrival of the family member of the beneficiary of the 
Withdrawal Agreement in the Republic and the competent 
authority, upo n submission of the application for the granting 
of a residence document and the payment of thirty euros (€30), 
immediately issues a certificate of submission of the said 
application.  
 
 Granting 
residence 
document.  35J - (1) The right of residence of family members of 
beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement who are not 
nationals of the United Kingdom is certified by a document 
called "residence document of a family member of a 
beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreemen t who is not a national 8 
 of the United Kingdom”, which is issued by the competent 
authority following the submission of an application in 
accordance with Regulation (EC) no. 1030/2002, and is 
granted no later than six months from the date of the 
application ’s submission.  
 
         (2) For the granting of the residence document referred to 
in sub section (1), in accordance with Regulation (EC) no. 
1030/2002, the respective family members of a beneficiary of 
the Withdrawal Agreement are required to provide do cuments 
corresponding to the documents referred to in sub section (2) 
of section 12, as the case may be.  
  
 Validity of the 
residence 
document.  35JΑ - (1) The period of validity of the residence document 
provided for in sub section (1) of section 35J shall be five years 
from the date of issue.  
  (2) The provisions of sub sections (2) to (5) of section 13 are 
also valid for residence documents of family members of 
beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement who are not 
nationals of the United Kingdom.   
 
 General rule.  35JΒ - (1) Beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement, who 
have legally resided in the Republic for a continuous period of 
five years before the end of the transitional period, or for a 
cumulative continuous period of five years before and after the 
end of the transition period, have the right of permanent 
residence and this right is not subject to the terms laid down  in 
Parts III and VI.  
 
  (2) The provisions of sub section (1) also apply to family 
members of a beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement who 
are not nationals of the United Kingdom, and who have legally 
resided in the Republic with the beneficiary of the Withdrawal 
Agreement for a continuous period of five years before the end 9 
 of the transition period, or for a cumulative continuous period 
of fiv e years before and after the end of the transition period.  
 
  (3) When the right of permanent residence is acquired, the 
loss of this right occurs only in case of absence from the 
Republic for a period of more than five years.    
 
 Derogations for  
people who no  
longer work in 
the Republic and 
for their family 
members.  35JC. Any reference to a European Union citizen or family 
members in section 15 is also valid for the beneficiaries of the 
Withdrawal Agreement and their family members.  
 
 Acquirement  of 
the right of 
permanent 
residence by 
certain family 
members who 
are not 
nationals of the 
United 
Kingdom . 35JD. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 35JC, 
the respective family members of the beneficiary of the 
Withdrawal Agreement to whom sub section (2) of section 35K 
and sub section (2) of section 35KA apply, and who fulfil the 
terms laid down in the said sub sections , acquire the right of 
permanent residence if they reside legally in the Republic for 
a period of five consecutive years.  
 
 Permanent 
residence 
document . 35JΕ. Once the competent authority verifies the period of 
stay in the Republic of the beneficiaries of the Withdrawal 
Agreement, who are beneficiaries of permanent residence, 
upon their application submitted in the form decide d by the 
competent authority and with the payment of a fee of thirty 
euros (€ 30), they shall be granted a document of permanent 
residence in the Republic valid for ten years, in accordance 
with Regulation (EC) No. 1030/2002 and with the indication 
that it  is issued in accordance with paragraph 4 of article 18 of 
the Withdrawal Agreement. The said document is 
automatically renewed every ten years from the date of issue, 
following a relevant application of the party concerned and the 
payment of a fee of thir ty euros (€ 30).  10 
  Permanent 
residence 
document for 
family members 
who are not 
nationals of the 
United 
Kingdom.   35JF - (1) Family members of a beneficiary of the 
Withdrawal Agreement who are not nationals of the United 
Kingdom and who are beneficiaries of permanent residence, 
upon an application submitted in the form decided by the 
competent authority and with the payment of a fee of thirty 
euros (€ 30), they shall be granted a document of permanent 
residence in the Republic, valid for ten years, in acco rdance 
with Regulation (EC) No. 1030/2002 and with the indication 
that it is issued in accordance with paragraph 4 of article 18 of 
the Withdrawal Agreement, within six months from the 
submission of the relevant application. This document is 
automatically renewed every ten years from the date of issue, 
following a relevant application of the party concerned and the 
payment of a fee of thirty euros (€30).  
  
  (2)(a) The application for a permanent residence document 
is required to be submitted by the party concerned within one 
month from the expiration of the validity of the residence 
document.  
 
  (b) Failure to comply with the requirement to submit an 
application for granting a permanent residence permit in time 
constitutes an offense punishable to a fine not exceeding two 
thousand five hundred euros (€2,500).  
 
  (3) Interruption of residence, which does not exceed five 
consecutive years, does not affect the validity of the 
permanent residence document for nationals of the United 
Kingdom who are beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement, 
and their respective family members.  
 
 Territo rial 
application.  
 35JG. The right of residence and the right of permanent 
residence of the beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement 
and of their respective family members, to whom this Part 11 
 applies, covers the areas under the control of the Government 
of the Republic.  
 
 Related rights.  35JΗ. Family members of the beneficiary of the Withdrawal 
Agreement, regardless of nationality, who have the right of 
residence or the right of permanent residence in the Republic, 
are entitled to undertake employee or self -employed activit y.  
 
 Equal treatment 
of the 
beneficiary of 
the Withdrawal 
Agreement.  35JI - (1) Subject to the special provisions expressly 
provided in the Withdrawal Agreement, the beneficiaries of the 
Withdrawal Agreement residing in the Republic under the 
provisions of this Part shall enjoy equal treatment with the 
citizens of the Repub lic in the areas covered by the Treaty. The 
provisions of this section also apply to respective family 
members of the beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement, who 
are not nationals of the United Kingdom and who have the right 
of residence or permanent resi dence under the Withdrawal 
Agreement and under the provisions of this Law.  
 
  (2) As a derogation from the provisions of sub section (1), 
there shall be no entitlement to social benefits during the first 
three months of residence, or, where appropriate, during the 
longer period in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 
(b) of sub section (4) of section 35KB, nor will maintenance 
allowance be provided prior to the acquirement of the right of 
permanent residence for studies, including vocat ional training, 
consisting of scholarships for studies or student loans to 
persons other than employees, self -employed , to persons 
retaining this status, and to their respective family members.  
 
  (3) The provisions of sub sections (1) and (2) concerning 
any rights other than the right of residence in the Republic shall 
apply only in relation to the beneficiaries of the Withdrawal 12 
 Agreement and to their respective family members residing in 
areas under the control of the Government o f the Republic.  
 
 Retention of the 
right of 
residence by 
family members 
in case of death 
or departure 
from the 
Republic . 35Κ - (1) The death of a beneficiary of the Withdrawal 
Agreement or his/her departure from the Republic does not 
affect the right of residence of his/her respective family 
members who are nationals of the United Kingdom and 
beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement:  
  
  Provided that, before acquiring the right of permanent 
residence, the parties concerned are required to fulfil the terms 
set out in section 35G.  
 
  (2) The death of a beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement 
is not be treated as loss of the right of residence for members 
of his/her family who are not nationals of the United Kingdom 
and beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement, and who have 
resided in the Republic as members of his/her family for at 
least one year prior to the death of the beneficiary of the 
Withdrawal Agreement:  
 
  Provided that, before acquiring the right of permanent 
residence, the right of residence for the persons concerned is 
subject to the condition that they can prove they are 
employees or self - employed or that they have sufficient 
resources for themselves an d their family members, so as not 
to burden the social welfare system of the Republic during their 
stay, and that they have full health insurance in the Republic, 
or that they are members of a family already established in the 
Republic, of a person who ful fils the above conditions.  
 
  (3) The family members referred to in sub sections (1) and 
(2) retain the right of residence exclusively on an individual 
basis.  13 
  
  (4) The departure of the beneficiary of the Withdrawal 
Agreement from the Republic or his/her death is not to be 
treated as loss of the right of residence for his/her children or 
a parent who has actual custody of the children, regardless of 
nationality, as long as the children reside in the Republic and 
are enrolled in an educational insti tution for the purpose of 
studying in the Republic, until the completion of their studies.  
 
 Retention of the 
right of 
residence by 
family members 
in case of 
divorce or 
annulment of 
marriage.  35ΚΑ - (1) Divorce or the annulment of marriage does not 
affect the right of residence of the family members of the 
beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement, who are nationals of 
the United Kingdom and beneficiaries of the Withdrawal 
Agreement:  
  
  Provided that, prior to acquiring the right of permanent 
residence, the persons concerned are required to fulfil the 
terms prescribed in section 35G.  
 
  (2) Divorce or the annulment of marriage is not to be treated 
as loss of the right of residence for the family members of the 
beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement, who are not 
nationals of the United Kingdom and beneficiaries of the 
Withdrawal Agreement , in the following cases:  
 
  (a)   If the marriage lasted at least three years before the 
beginning of the divorce or annulment procedure, of 
which one year in the Republic; or  
 
  (b)   
  if the custody of the children of the beneficiary of the 
Withdrawal Agreement has been entrusted to the 
spouse who is not a United Kingdom national and a 
beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement, under an 14 
 agreement between the spouses duly certified  by a 
competent court or by a court order; or  
 
  (c)    if this is dictated by particularly difficult circumstances, 
including in cases where the family member was a 
victim of domestic violence, as defined in the Violence 
in the Family (Prevention and Protection of Victims) 
Law, while he/she was still married; or  
 
  (d)   
  if the spouse of a beneficiary of the Withdrawal 
Agreement, who is not a national of the United Kingdom, 
enjoys, under an agreement between the spouses and 
duly certified by a competent court or by a court order, 
the right of access to a minor child, provi ded that the 
court has ruled that this communication must take place 
in the Republic and for as long as necessary :  
 
  Provided that before acquiring the right of permanent 
residence, the right of residence for those concerned is subject 
to the condition that they can prove they are employees or self -
employed  or that they have sufficient resources for 
themselves and their family members, so as not to burden the 
social welfare system of the Republic during their stay, and 
that they have full health insuran ce in the Republic, or that they 
are members of a family already established in the Republic, 
of a person who fulfils the above conditions.  
 
  (3) The family members referred to in sub sections (1) and 
(2) retain the right of residence exclusively on a personal basis.  
   
 Terms for 
retaining  
the right of 
residence.  35ΚΒ - (1) The beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement 
and their family members retain the right of residence provided 15 
 for in section 35F, as long as they do not constitute an 
excessive burden on the social welfare system of the Republic.  
 
  (2) The beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement and their 
family members have the right of residence provided for in 
sections 35G, 35K and 35KA, as long as they fulfil the terms 
set out in those sections, whereas in certain cases when there 
is reasonable doubt as to whether the beneficiary of the 
Withdrawal Agreement or his/her family members fulfil the 
terms set out in those sections, the competent authority may 
check that these terms are fulfilled:  
 
  Provided that, this check may not be made as a matter of 
routine.  
    
  (3) Recourse to the social welfare system of the Republic 
by a beneficiary of the Withdrawal Agreement or a member of 
his/her family does not automatically entail the adoption of 
measures for deportation. In such a case, the competent 
authority must examin e whether this is a case of temporary 
difficulties and take into account the period of residence of the 
person concerned in the Republic, his/her personal 
circumstances and the amount of aid granted to him/her, in 
order to assess whether the beneficiary is  an excessive burden 
on the social welfare system and, subsequently, to adopt 
measures for his/her deportation.  
  (4) As a derogation from sub sections (1) and (2) and without 
prejudice to the provisions of sections 35KD and 35KE, in no 
case shall a depor tation measure be taken by the competent 
authority against beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement or 
members of their families, provided that the beneficiaries of the 
Withdrawal Agreement -  
 16 
   (a)  are employees or self - employed ; or  
 
  (b)  have entered the territory of the Republic to look for 
work. In such a case, the beneficiaries of the Withdrawal 
Agreement and their family members cannot be 
deported as long as they can provide evidence that they 
continue to look for work and that they have a real 
chance of being hired.  
 
 Procedural 
guarantees . 35ΚC - (1) The procedures provided for in sections 32 and 
33 shall apply mutatis mutandis to any decision restricting the 
free movement of beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement 
and members of their family for reasons other than public 
order, public security or public health.  
 
  (2) The expiration of the validity of an identity card or 
passport, with which the person concerned entered the 
Republic and was granted a residence permit, shall not 
constitute a reason for deportation from the Republic.  
 
  (3) The competent authority shall not impose refusal of entry in 
conjunction with a decision for deportation for which the 
provisions of sub section (1) apply.  
 
 General 
principles . 35ΚD - (1) The competent authority may impose restrictions 
on the right of free movement and residence of the 
beneficiaries of the Withdrawal Agreement and of their family 
members, regardless of nationality, for reasons of public order, 
public security or public heal th, and the provisions of 
subsections (2) and (3) of section 29 shall apply mutatis 
mutandis.  
 17 
   (2) In order to determine whether the person concerned 
poses a threat to public order or public security, when issuing 
a residence document to a beneficiary o f the Withdrawal 
Agreement or a family member of a beneficiary of the 
Withdrawal Agreement, the competent authority may, if 
deemed necessary, request from the country of origin of the 
person concerned or, where appropriate, from other States, to 
receive in formation regarding the criminal record that the 
person concerned may have, within two months at the latest:  
 
  Provided that this investigation may not be systematic.  
  
 Protection 
against 
deportation.  35ΚΕ. Before taking a decision on deportation for reasons 
of public order or public security, the competent authority shall 
take into account the period of residence of the person 
concerned in the Republic, the age, state of health, family and 
financial situation, social and cultural integ ration in the Republic 
and the extent of ties with the country of origin, and for the 
purposes of taking the relevant decision, the provisions of 
subsections (2) and (3) of section 30 shall apply mutatis 
mutandis.  
 
 Publicity . 35ΚF. The competent authority shall publish information on 
the rights and obligations of the beneficiaries of the Withdrawal 
Agreement and their family members on matters regulated by 
this Part, in particular through awareness -raising campaigns 
conducted t hrough national and local media and other means 
of communication.  
 
Entry into  
force of  
this   
Law 4. The date of entry into force of this Law is to be fixed by the Council of 
Ministers, by a Decision published in the Official Gazette of the Republic.  
 
 