 
ΕΝ CIVIL REGI STRY AND MIGRATION DEPARTMENT  
INSTRUCTIONS  AND INFORMATION  
MUKW 1 
 
 
1 
INSTRUCTIONS AND INFORMATION  
 
Α. WHO IS ALLOWED  TO SUBMIT  AN APPLICATION  FOR A RESIDENCE DOCUMENT?  
1. UK Nationals and their family members who are also UK Nationals and αre entitled of free movement residence rights in the 
Republic of Cyprus, under the provisions of the Withdrawal Agreement  
 
B. APPLICATION SUBMISSION AND FEES : 
 
1. The application can be submitted on line through the platform  eas.crmd.moi.gov.cy  or in person at the central offices of the Civil 
Registry and Migration Department for residen ts of the Nicosia District  or at the District Units of the Aliens and Immigration Service 
of the Police for the other Districts.  
 
2. The application  can be a single  person  application (i.e. can be submitted  for only one person ) or a family application (i.e. can be 
submitted for more than one member  of the same family ).  
 
3. The payable  fees for the application  submission  are €30,00  per person .  
 
4. In case  of an on-line application  submission , fees are paid by bank  card.  
 
5. In the case of an on -line application, after the application submission an in person visit to the central offices of the Civil Registry 
and Migration Department for residents of the Nicosia Distric t or at the District Units of the Aliens and Immigration Service of the 
Police for the other Districts, is necessary for the submission of the accompanying documents listed in par. A.  During  the visit the 
on-line application  submission  receipt  is requested .  
 
6. Furthermore, during the visit the biometric data (photo and fingerprints) and the signature of the applicant/ applicants will  be 
submitted  based on the legislation in force . Fingerprints and signature are not submitted  for applicants that have not completed the 
age of 6 at the time of application submission.  
 
7. Any false statement, made in the application or the accompanying supportive documents, is an offense punishable by imprisonme nt 
or fine as set out in the relevant legislation.  
 
C. ISSUE AND RECEIPT OF THE RESIDENCE DOCUMENT  
 
1. The document  will be issued upon approval of the application, and it will be in the form defined by the law (card).  
 
2. Upon issuance of the document , a notification will be sent to the applicant/ applicants , with which she/he must receive her / his 
document from the office where the application was submitted. The notice is sent to the address listed in the application.  
 
3. No document  shall be delivered t o any non duly authorised person.  
 
4. The Residence Document shall be valid for five years , after the end of this period the right to apply for a permanent residence is 
given to the applicant.  
 
For further  information please visit  www .moi.gov.cy/crmd   
 
 
D. ACCOMPANYING  DOCUMENTS  
 
1. The application shall be accompanied by the required documents listed in the relevant List of Accompanying Documents, depending 
on the type of application submitted. The List of Accompanying Documents is available at the Central Office of the CRMD, or a t the 
CRMD website: www.moi.gov.cy/crmd  
 
2. All documents submitted with the application shall be in Greek or English. Otherwise, they must be accompanied by a certified  
translation into one of these languages . 
 
 