 
ΕΝ CIVIL REGI STRY AND MIGRATION DEPARTMENT  
INSTRUCTIONS  AND INFORMATION  
MUKW3  
 
 
1 
INSTRUCTIONS AND INFORMATION  
 
Α. WHO IS ALLOWED  TO SUBMIT  AN APPLICATION  FOR A PERMANENT RESIDENCE DOCUMENT?  
1. UK national s and UK national s’ family members  who are themselves UK nationals , after a five -year period of uninterrupted legal 
residence in the Republic of Cyprus before the transitional period or commencement  of periods before and after the transitional 
period.  
 
2. UK national’s family members who are not UK nationals , given that they maintain the residence rights deriving from the Withdrawal 
Agreement, after a five -year period of uninterrupted legal residence  in the Republic of Cyprus before the transitional period or 
commencement  of periods before and after the transitional period.  
 
3. Holders  of a Registration  Certificate  (MEU1)  or a Residence  Card  (MEU2) can apply  for a Permanent Residence Card , given that 
they have  resided in the Republic for an interrupted period of  five years prior to the end of the transitional period  and that they can 
prove their uninterrupted residence by submitting relevant document s, or given that they complete  five years of uninterrupted 
residence before and after the transitional period . Docum ent to be submitted during the application process :  
 
DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FROM MEU1, MEU2 HOLDERS  
Copy of MEU1, or MEU2  
Valid passport and copies of the same  
Water bills or electricity bills or any other bills (except phone bills) for the past 5 years that have been issued by the relevant 
authority or 
Bank statements for the past 5 years or 
Monthly statements of Social Insurance contributions for the past 5 years or 
Any other document which proves continued residence in the Republic of Cyprus for the past 5 years   
 
4. Holders  of a Permanent  Residence  Certificate  /Card (MEU 3) can if the wish to convert  their document  into a Permanent Residence 
Document , by submitting the following during the application process :  
 
DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FROM MEU3 HOLDERS  
Copy of MEU3  
Valid passport and copies of the same  
 
5. The validity of the  Permanent Residence Document shall not be affected by temporary absences not exceeding six months in a 
year, or by absences of a longer duration for compulsory military service or by one absence of a maximum of 12 consecutive 
months for important reasons such as pregnancy and childbirth, seriou s illness, study or vocational training, or a posting in another 
Member State or a third country.  
 
6. Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be lost only through absence from the Republic of Cyprus for a 
period exceeding five consecutive years . 
 
7. Permanent Residence Certificate or the Permanent Residence Card holders and the holders of the Certificate of Registration and 
Residence Card have the right of permanent residence in the Republic for 10 years upon application, if they have completed five 
years of continuous residence in the Republic before the end of the  transition period  or even after the end of the transitional period 
inclusive periods.  
 
 
8. Registration Certificate holders have the right of permanen t residence in the Republic of Cyprus shall be enjoyed before completion 
of a continuous period of five years (exemptions) of residence or commencement of periods before or and after the transitiona l 
period under those circumstances:  
 
a) Employees or self -employed persons who, at the time they stop working, have reached the age laid down by the Cyprus Social 
Insurance Law in force for entitlement to an old age pension or employees who cease paid employment to take early retirement,  
provide d that they have been working in the Republic of Cyprus for at least the preceding twelve months and have reside in 
Cyprus continuously for more than three years.  
 
b) Employees or self -employed persons who have resided continuously in the Republic of Cyprus f or more than two years  and 
stopped working in Cyprus as a result of permanent incapacity to work. Not with standing the above, if such incapacity is a r esult 
of an accident at work or an occupational disease entitling the person concerned to a benefit paya ble in full or in party by the  
ΕΝ CIVIL REGI STRY AND MIGRATION DEPARTMENT  
INSTRUCTIONS  AND INFORMATION  
MUKW3  
 
 
2 
If, however, the employee or self -employed person dies while still working but before acquiring permanent residence status in the 
Republic of Cyprus on the basis the EU directive 2004/38/EC (article 12(1)(2)), his family members who are residing with hi m in 
the Republic shall acquire the right of permanent residence on the condition that:   
i. The employee or self -employed person had, at the time of death, resided continuously on the territory of the Republic for 
two consecutive years.  
ii. The death resulted from an accident at work or an occupational disease.  Social Insurance Services or other benefit payable by in full or in part by a different authority by virtue of another releva nt law, 
no condition shall be imposed as to the length of residence;  
 
c) Employees or self -employed persons who, after three  years of continuous employment and residence in the Republic of Cyprus, 
while retaining their place of residence in the Republic of Cyprus, to which they return at least once a week.  
 
9. For the purposes of entitlement to the rights referred to in points 4 (a) and (b), are periods of employment spent in the Republic of 
Cyprus.  Periods of involuntary unemployment duly recorded by the Labour Department, periods away from work for reasons not  of 
the person’s own making and absences from work or cessations of work due to illness or accident shall be regarded as periods of 
employment.  
 
10. Irrespective of nationality Residence card holders, the non-UK family members of a UK national, employee or a self-employed 
person who are residing with him in the territory of the Republic of Cyprus shall have the right of permanent residence, if t he 
employee or self -employed person has acquired himself the right of permanent residence in the Republic of Cyprus . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. APPLICATION SUBMISSION AND FEES : 
 
1. The application can be submitted on line through the platform  eas.crmd.moi.gov.cy or in person at the central offices of the Civil 
Registry and Migration Department for residen ts of the Nicosia District  or at the District Units of the Aliens and Immigration Service 
of the Police for the other Districts.  
 
2. The application  can be a single  person  application (i.e. can be submitted  for only one person ) or a family application (i.e. can be 
submitted for more than one member  of the same family ).  
 
3. The payable  fees for the application  submission  are €30,00  per person .  
 
4. The Republic of Cyprus shall issue to UK family members who are not UK nationals, entitled to permanent residence a Permanent 
Residence Document valid for 10 years which shall be renewable every 10 years from the date of issue upon request of the pers on 
concerned and with the payment of a fee of €30,00.  
 
5. In case  of an on-line application  submission , fees are paid by bank  card.  
 
6. The application for a Permanent Residence Document MUKW3 must be submitted within one month from the expiration of validity 
of the Residence Document MUKW1, MUKW2 or the Residence Card MEU2.  
 
7. In the case of an on -line application, after the application submission an in person visit to the central offices of the Civil Registry 
and Migration Department for residents of the Nicosia District or at the District Units of the Aliens and Immigration Se rvice of the 
Police for the other Districts, is necessary for the submission of the accompanying documents listed in par. A.  During  the visit the 
on-line application  submission  receipt  is requested .  
 
8. Furthermore, during the visit the biometric data (photo  and fingerprints) and the signature of the applicant/ applicants will be 
submitted  based on the legislation in force . Fingerprints and signature are not submitted  for applicants that have not completed the 
age of 6 at the time of application submission.  
 
9. Any false statement, made in the application or the accompanying supportive documents, is an offense punishable by imprisonme nt 
or fine as set out in the relevant  legislation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
ΕΝ CIVIL REGI STRY AND MIGRATION DEPARTMENT  
INSTRUCTIONS  AND INFORMATION  
MUKW3  
 
 
3 
C. ISSUE AND RECEIPT OF THE PERMANENT RESIDENCE DOCUMENT  
 
1. The document  will be issued upon approval of the application, and it will be in the form defined by the law (card).  
 
2. Upon issuance of the document , a notification will be sent to the applicant/ applicants , with which she/he must receive her / his 
document from the office where the application was submitted. The notice is sent to the address listed in the application.  
 
3. No document  shall be delivered to any non duly authorized  person.  
 
For further  information please visit  www .moi.gov.cy/crmd   
 
 
D. ACCOMPANYING  DOCUMENTS  
 
1. The application shall be accompanied by the required documents listed in the relevant List of Accompanying Documents, depending 
on the type of application submitted. The List of Accompanying Documents is available at the Central Office of the CRMD, or a t the 
CRMD website: www.moi.gov.cy/crmd  
 
2. All documents submitted with the application shall be in Greek or English. Otherwise, they must be accompanied by a certified  
translation into one of these languages . 
 
 