 
   
What is the Assisted Voluntary Return 
(AVR) Programme?  
 
The AVR is a return assistance programme offered to 
asylum seekers and migrants without a legal right to reside in Cyprus. It aims to provide assistance to those 
who are willing to return voluntarily to their home countries 
in an organised, safe and digni 
ed manner . 
 As a returnee under the voluntary return Cyprus programme, 
you are eligible for cash assistance provided by the Return 
Oce of the Migration Department to help you get started 
once you go back to your home country. The cash grant ranges vary between nationalities and country of origin.  
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
AVR programme includes:  
 
%Non-binding and individual counselling which is free of 
charge. 
%Assistance in making a well-informed decision. 
%The protection of the returnees. 
%Returning home in a safe and digni ,ed manner. 
%Organisational support. 
%Provision of a considerable amount of cash. 
 
  
   Who is eligible?
 
 
Asylum seekers with a pending asylum application. 
People who have withdrawn their asylum application. 
People whose asylum application has been rejected. 
People whose appeal to the Administrative Court of In-
ternational Protection has been rejected. 
Any migrant not registered with the Government of 
Cyprus and without a right to stay. 
 
The AVR programme service will:  
 
explain your return options through counselling; 
help you obtain travel documents, if necessary; 
assist with travel arrangements to the ,nal destination; 
provide any other type of pre-return assistance; 
pay for all travel expenses; 
offer assistance during departure at the airport; 
offer ,nancial assistance, in cash, prior to departure to 
the country of origin. 
 
T h e  a c t u a l  p r o c e s s  o f  t h e  A V R         
Programme 
 
Step 1: Visit one of the counselling centres located 
in all Districts of the country, as well as the “Pournara” First Reception Centre or contact one of the return programme counsellors 
to discuss your options. You can also book 
an appointment by sending an email to     returncounselling@moi.gov.cy. You can talk in-depth about the process of voluntary 
return and the possibilities for support that 
are available to you, based on your residence status and nationality. This will ensure that you make a well-informed decision. 
 
Step 2: Fill in the declaration form, which can be 
provided by the counsellor or can be found on the Migration Department website.  
     
The counsellor may provide you with assis-tance in ,lling in the declaration form. At 
this point, it may be helpful to inform the 
counsellor about any medical condition, so 
as to be dealt with accordingly. The infor-mation provided will facilitate the process for your convenience. 
 
Step 3: In case you encounter di culties with your 
travel documents, please notify the coun-sellors and the AVR programme will proceed 
to all necessary arrangements. 
 
Step 4: With the assistance of the counsellor, you 
will be informed about the ight options 
and the details of your journey. 
 
Step 5: The AVR programme will cover all travel ex-
penses and provide you with the ight con-
,rmation, as well as practical information 
regarding the journey. 
 
Step 6: On the day of the ight, a dedicated staff 
member/voluntary return o cer will be wait-
ing for you at the airport to assist you with check-in and help you with custom formali-ties. At this point, right before departure, 
you will receive ,nancial assistance for the 
journey, in cash.
 
  
 
        
  
Reintegration Support
 
 
People who wish to return to their home country may be 
eligible to bene ,t from reintegration assistance as offered 
by one of the reintegration partners. Reintegration partners offer a variety of reintegration packages, divided into post-
arrival (3 days after the travel), and post-return (up to 12 
months) assistance.   
Post-Arrival Assistance  
 
• Airport pick-up or reception at place of arrival 
• Temporary accommodation • In-country travel assistance • Referrals for urgent medical care • Special assistance for vulnerable people after arrival 
 
Post-Return Assistance  
 
• Business start-up assistance • Long-term housing support • Social, legal and medical support 
• Job placement assistance 
• Schooling  • Language training
  
 
 
 Assisted Voluntary        
Return (AVR)  
Programme
PIO 000/2024 - 2.500 
Published by the Press and Information Office, Republic of Cyprus Printed by the Government Printing Office 
Republic of Cyprus
 Funded by the 
European Union 
 Contact information:
 
 
Returns O ce, Migration Department  90, Arch. Makarios III, 
1077 Lefkosia Tel.: 22308759. 22308804/802 Email: returncounselling@moi.gov.cy   Asylum Service  www.moi.gov.cy/asylum  Tel.: 22308501/505  Email: info@asylum.moi.gov.cy    Aliens and Immigration Unit , Lefkosia 6, Agamemnonos 
Street, 2411 Egkomi Tel.: 22802360  
 
Aliens and Immigration Unit , Lemesos  
223, Franklin Roosevelt,“D. Nikolaou” Building, 2nd floor, 3046 
Zakaki  
Tel.: 25805211  
 
Aliens and Immigration Unit , Larnaka  
34, Tasos Mitsopoulos Street, 6027 Larnaka  
Tel.: 24804223/24804226  
 Aliens and Immigration Unit , Pafos  
22, Eleftherios Venizelos Street and Kaningos corner, 2nd 
floor, 8021 Pafos  
Tel.: 26806222  
 Aliens and Immigration Unit , Ammochostos  
31, Giorki Papadopoulou Street, 5282 Paralimni  
Tel.: 23803286
Benefit from the financial support for 
voluntary return and reintegration for 
Third Country Nationals in Cyprus